JPMorgan Chase to Pay $264 Million to Settle Foreign Bribery Charges

Vying for lucrative deals in China, JPMorgan Chase deployed all the usual wining-and-dining tactics that big banks use to woo clients. JPMorgan, federal authorities now say, also had ways of sweetening the deal that crossed a legal line.

Federal prosecutors and regulators announced on Thursday a settlement of roughly $264 million with the bank and its Hong Kong subsidiary, accusing them of a vast foreign bribery scheme that may have spread to a number of Wall Street banks.

The case, the first of what could be several settlements with these banks, centers on JPMorgan’s hiring practices in China, where it is accused of hiring the children of Chinese leaders to win business in the fast-growing nation. Some of the well-connected candidates were unqualified, the authorities said, and often “performed ancillary work” — telltale signs of hidden bribery.

As the bank hired more and more candidates based on referrals from Chinese leaders, the prosecutors and regulators say, senior JPMorgan bankers in several instances explicitly tied those jobs or internships to securing deals with Chinese government-run companies. To be hired, a referred candidate had to have, in the bank’s own words, a “directly attributable linkage to business opportunity,” a scheme that netted the bank at least $35 million in profits.

Until now, it was not known whether the authorities would explicitly accuse the bank of carrying out a quid pro quo arrangement, an issue at the heart of whether JPMorgan violated United States law governing foreign bribery.

The bank argued that the hiring of well-connected employees was routine in China, and that its own hires fell into a gray area of foreign bribery laws.

“The common refrain that this is simply how business is done overseas is no defense,” said Robert L. Capers, the United States attorney in Brooklyn, whose office helped lead the criminal investigation into the bank. “This is no longer business as usual; it is corruption.”

Still, the authorities acknowledged that JPMorgan cooperated extensively with the investigation and they lowered the penalty accordingly. The bank, the authorities stated, also disciplined nearly two dozen employees and “took significant employment action” that led to the departure of six employees who participated in the misconduct.

“We’re pleased that our cooperation was acknowledged,” a JPMorgan spokesman, Brian Marchiony, said in a statement. “The conduct was unacceptable.”

“We stopped the hiring program in 2013 and took action against the individuals involved,” Mr. Marchiony added. “We have also made improvements to our hiring procedures, and reinforced the high standards of conduct expected of our people.”