Wall St. Is Higher as Oil Prices Rise

United States markets were higher in early trading on Thursday, led by energy companies as the price of crude oil rose.

KEEPING SCORE The Dow Jones industrial average rose 0.08 percent and the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index was up 0.23 percent. The Nasdaq composite index gained 0.21 percent.

EARLY MOVERS Shares of Chevron rose 1 percent, the biggest gain in the Dow. In earnings news, Best Buy stock rose 6 percent after the company reported greater sales of mobile phones and increased online sales and gave a strong forecast. Shares of Walmart fell 4 percent after the company reported disappointing sales in the third quarter. Western Refining stock surged 24 percent after a competitor, Tesoro, agreed to buy the company for $4.1 billion.

YELLEN FOCUS Markets were assessing the testimony of the Federal Reserve chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, who was speaking before Congress. Though the election of Donald J. Trump as the next president has complicated the economic outlook, financial markets still think that a Fed rate increase next month is far more likely than not. However, the amount of the increase could be affected by Mr. Trump’s victory, investors believe. Mr. Trump has promised to cut taxes and raise infrastructure spending, measures that could increase economic growth and potentially spur inflation. Those promises have prompted a rally in stocks, a sell-off of bond yields and a concurrent rise in the dollar.

ANALYST’S TAKE “With chances of a rate hike now at 94 percent for December, there is a risk that the Fed’s leader could spark a bout of dollar weakness if she so much as hints at the possibility that the central bank won’t move in December,” said Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG. “Thus currencies like the yen and the euro, which have fallen hard over the past few days against the U.S. dollar, could be due a decent bounce, with worrying consequences for equity markets in those countries.”

DOLLAR Ahead of her testimony, the dollar was fairly steady. While the euro was up 0.1 percent at $1.0698, the dollar was 0.3 percent higher against the Japanese yen at 109.37 yen.

OIL Energy markets are keeping a close watch on the dollar’s reaction to Ms. Yellen’s testimony. In the run-up to it, benchmark United States crude oil rebounded, rising 72 cents, to $46.26 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude, which is used to price international oils, added 73 cents, to $47.32 a barrel in London.

EUROPEAN MARKETS In Germany, the DAX fell 0.2 percent and in France, the CAC 40 was up 0.1 percent. The FTSE 100 was up 0.2 percent in Britain.

ASIA’S DAY The Nikkei 225 was flat in Japan, while in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng eased 0.1 percent. The Shanghai composite index added 0.1 percent in China. In Australia, the S.&P./ASX 200 gained 0.2 percent. Benchmarks in Taiwan, South Korea and Singapore gained.